---
layout: post
title: Super Duper Primordial Black Holes from Axions 
#subtitle: 
tags: [QCD axion]
comments: true
mathjax: true
#author: 
---

With Miguel Faria, an undergraduate student at U.Coimbra, and Fabrizio Rompineve we showed [here](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.07890) 
that due to inflationary diffusion, the QCD axion can form some extended objects called domain walls which end up forming
very (very) massive primordial black holes.


**The long story...**

The search for the QCD axion continues in multiple forms. This time, we asked the question: if axions are present during the period of cosmic
inflation and the inflationary diffusion is large, what will happen?

Inflationary Diffusion --
Gravitational effects during inflation are known to diffuse light (or massless) scalar fields such as the axion. 
A process that has been famously described by Starobinsky as stochastic. 
Crucially, and in contrast with other scalar fields, axions have a periodic behavior which can be more formally described 
as a discrete symmetry. 
What happens then if diffusion can move parts of field to the second period? During inflation, nothing special
happens; the field just undergoes an excursion that is larger for small scales.
However, after inflation, as the universe cools down and the expansion rate decreases, those diffused axions
will start oscillating. Quickly, they will realize that in the regions of space, where the axion was diffused
to the second period, the oscillations will take place around a minimum that is different from the rest of the universe.

Domain walls --
Dividing those regions, there are what physicists call domain walls, extended and dense objects that store a significant
amount of scalar field energy.
That was the missing link that we found with respect to some previous work. Because domain walls redshift more slowly with the
expansion, their relative energy density can increase significantly.

Particle Dark Matter or Primordial Black Holes--
Those domain walls survive until their physical radius becomes comparable to the cosmological horizon, 
the Hubble scale. Afterwards, they typically collapse into the dark matter axion particles unless...
they are so massive that their would be Schwarzschild radius is larger than the cosmological horizon.
In such case, the walls collapse into primordial black holes (PBHs).

Super Duper PBHs--
Primordial Black Holes are already somewhat exotic, but these have an extra layer of strangeness; they are very (very) 
massive. So massive that they have been called stupendeously large PBHs.
In fact, their mass is larger than the (TOTAL!) mass of galaxies.
But, to our great surprise, this hypothetical population of PBHs has not been excluded observationally!

So, one could ask:
Are these giant dark monsters the messengers of the axion kingdom?  


